Module 1 video 2: Investigating people and social media accounts - Beyond
Breaking News
[00:00:00] Hi, welcome to the second lesson in Investigating people and social media accounts.
I'm Brandy Zadrozny an investigative and features reporter for NBC News.
[00:00:09] In this video, I'm going to focus on social media stories that go beyond backgrounding
and breaking news. One of my favorite kinds of social media sleuthing stories are those that
unmask secret, fake and anonymous social media accounts, which can have outsized impacts on
local government, business, politics, misinformation and more. Stories in this genre include
Ashley Feinberg's brilliant reveal of the secret accounts of James Comey and Mitt Romney. Her
secret was simply a matter of finding smaller accounts of family members that Comey and
Romney would naturally want to follow and then scrolling through those accounts followers until
she found one that seemed inauthentic. More often what you'll encounter is an anonymous
account that you want to get to the bottom of.
[00:00:52] In 2019 , when a video of a high school student seeming to taunt a Native American
protester went viral members of Congress wanted to know who was behind the anonymous
account responsible for the viral tweet, and news organizations suggested foreign influence. Her
account was deleted, but captures from the Wayback Machine showed links to an online store
where teachers buy and sell lesson plans and resources. I contacted her and found she wasn't a
bot or a foreign actor, she was just a liberal teacher from California who loved to tweet.
[00:01:21] So in trying to find out who's behind an account, I like to start from the beginning. You
can tell a lot about an account from its earliest posts, followers and follows. TweetBeaver is a
good tool for investigating the connections between accounts and downloading things like
timeline's and favorite's for smaller accounts. For the more technically savvy I use Twint. I'll
include links to these tools, but for today's purposes we're gonna stick to the advanced search
function.
[00:01:48] Let's take a look at the Columbia Bugle. A popular anonymous far right Twitter account
that boasts of presidential re tweets. When I'm looking at a mystery account. I like to start at the
beginning of someone's social media history and work forward in time. You can get there by hand
with the assist of an auto scroller extension. Or you can use Twitter's advanced search to limit the
time frame to the first few months of an account's existence.
[00:02:13] So this account was started in July 2015, but a search for the early tweets shows
nothing. This either means that no one tweeted from this account for at least the first six months,
or it suggests the more likely scenario that someone's been deleting tweets. So let's open our
date range up a bit.
[00:02:31] Lucky searching brings us to a dog pick. It's a great identifier for an anonymous
account. And I'm going to screenshot that for later.
[00:02:39] Now, we've got some early videos. Since many of Columbia Bugles tweets include
videos from San Diego, Trump rallies. We can start to guess that this person behind the account
might live near San Diego.
[00:02:51] Early followers and followers can also provide clues to an accounts, real location and
relationships. When you first open an account, an algorithm powers up influenced by a load of
factors, including the contacts list in your phone and your location. A platform will suggest
accounts to follow.
[00:03:07] So let's look at Max Delarge, an account claiming to be the editor of the Columbia
Bugle. Follows are listed in reverse chronological order. Here the earliest follows are San Diego
specific new sources and San Diego specific sports accounts, more evidence to suggest that this
account owner lives or lived in San Diego. You can do the same relationship hunting on other
platforms. 
[00:03:30] One more trick, like in the case of the Columbia Bugle, sometimes a user will delete
earlier tweets. When you see a discrepancy between the date when an account was created and
the first tweet. You can tweak your search. So instead of tweets from the account, I'll look for any
tweets mentioning the Columbia Bugle. I'll then read all of these one sided conversations to get
more clues.
[00:03:52] Another way you can look at tweet's past is every journalist best friend. The Internet
archives, Wayback Machine. Looking at an accounts, deleted tweets and how the account and
bio have been edited and evolved is always helpful.
[00:04:05] Another, often easier but just as revealing story can be found from looking through old
social media posts to uncover the opinions of local politicians or people in power before they
became so buttoned up. We did this in 2019. Looking at President Trump's ambassador
nominations and found the new ambassador to Slovenia had shared conspiracy theories,
including ones calling Bill and Hillary Clinton serial murderers.
[00:04:30] This year, Georgia's next likely congressional representative, Marjorie Taylor Green's old
Facebook posts revealed Greene's history of anti-Muslim sentiments and beliefs and conspiracy
theories. Several now deleted posts pointed me to an unreported conspiracy Web site where
Greene had blogged.
[00:04:46] Facebook doesn't make it easy to scroll back to old posts. So your best bet is to
manually scroll through and read every post if he can. If you know what you're searching for,
Facebook has a good native search function, too. As an example, we can go to Donald Trump's
Facebook page and see what his views were on vaccines before he became president.
[00:05:05] So a few tips. Start from the beginning. Use an accounts earliest follows, followers, and
conversations as clues to their real world identifiers like location and relationships. Search
mentions of an account, not just posts, to unearth deleted conversations and relationships. Use
the Wayback Machine to see previous Twitter bios and deleted tweets. Twitter and Facebook
have useful native advance search functions that allow searches by keywords, contacts and
dates. Use them.
[00:05:36] OK, and some homework. Dox Yourself.
[00:05:39] One of the best ways to practice following an online trail is to make yourself the target.
Open a browser you don't normally use and pretend you've just been given your own name. Try to
track your online trail.
[00:05:49] That's all for me for now. I've shown you some of my processes investigating social
media accounts, but know that because of privacy concerns or the whims of platform executives,
many of the tools that work today might not work tomorrow. Every reporter has their own favorite
process. But I've found that tools can only take you so far. It's obsession and virtual shoe leather
that yield the best results. So if you want to get the story, be prepared to read thousands of
tweets. Click until the end of the Google results and dove down a social media rabbit hole. 
