Module 3 Video 2: Whois searches and website archives
[00:00:00] Hi, welcome to our second video here in week 3, we're going to cover whois and also
archive analysis for Web sites.
[00:00:08] I've got a little case study here that we're going to do together. OK. So here's a Yahoo!
News article that was published in August of 2020. And at the core here is a claim, a claim that
the Antifa.com Web site is number one, redirecting to the political campaign Web site of Joe
Biden in the US. And number two, that it has a link to Russia. And so we can see here in the
article, you know, someone asked at a White House briefing why antifa.com is redirecting to Joe
Biden's Web site. And you don't need to know about American politics and we're not going to go
down that rabbit hole on it. But it's all that to say as it was seen as newsworthy and all that to say
as it was seen as potentially a negative thing for Joe Biden.
[00:00:52] But this claim about it kind of being linked to Russia is the thing that we want to look
at. Now the evidence that they cite is that the domain registration information at one point was
listing an address, a name, a company in Russia. OK. So let's dig into that more, because there's
a lot to learn and it's really applicable to lots of other scenarios.
[00:01:15] All right. So let's do this together. Get ready to get into your Web browser. All right. So
heading over here to Chrome, I'm going to put in antifa.com because we want to see if the claim
is true, that when you type that in, it goes to Joe Biden's Web site. And sure enough, it does. OK.
So that's true. Someone who owns antifa.com Has decided to to redirect it to Joe Biden's Web
site. And the key thing here is anybody can direct a Web site they own to any other Web site. That
doesn't mean it has any links to Biden and Yahoo! wasn't claiming that.
[00:01:49] But we do want to understand more about this claim, about a Russia link. And I'm
going to show you what they saw that made them make that claim. OK. So here we are on
DomainBigData.com. That's one of the Web sites that we're going to be using here. I encourage
you to load that up right now in your Web browser. And if you put in antifa.com in the search field
there. This is what we're going to see. So this is a typical kind of who is record. It's going to tell us
that the Web site, this domain was first registered in 2002. It's going to tell us, you know, the
registrant information. So in this case, we see someone or an entity named Whois Privacy
Services. And low and behold, we see information related to Russia. But here's the thing. That
name, Whois Privacy Services, that tells us that the person who bought this domain name actually
paid extra money to make sure their information was private.
[00:02:45] So when you see the registrant information for Whois record listing something like
Whois Privacy Services or private registration or something, as in this case, that's linked to
potentially a lot of domains. That means that it's a privacy service. It's not actually a person. So
the link to Russia simply means that someone decided to pay a Russian privacy service to protect
their domain information. Their ownership information. That's not a very strong link, is it? And the
other thing I want to draw your attention to here is, you know, there's detailed information. If you
scroll down a domain, big data. But what it tells us is that the last time this record was updated
was 2017. So now we know that in 2017 it showed this Russian private registration information.
[00:03:31] But can we get anything more recent? And the answer is yes. And that's where we go.
And we're gonna try out whoisology. So again, I just entered antifa.com in the search field and
this is what we get. And the good thing here is that we can see that whoisology has actually been
keeping track of antifa.com and its ownership information since April of 2013. And the record
we're seeing right now is from September of 2020. So it's more recent. And when we go in, we
look at the registering information. It no longer shows the one that we had before. It's got a
different privacy service. Who is guard protected. And this number here shows that that that
service is listed with more than 5.5 million other domain names. So it's a popular privacy service,
more popular than the Russian one. And it's registered in Panama.
[00:04:22] So, again, we still don't know who actually owns the domain, but we know that in 2017
it had a private register in Russia and now it no longer does. So how do you publish an article
claiming a link to Russia when we know it doesn't show that Russian info anymore. 
[00:04:38] And we can even dove deeper on this? OK, so normally I would have you look up here,
get your Wayback Machine plugin. See that that's where it shows up in your Chrome Web
browser and that we could save the page for later. Or we can look at a recent version or the first
version of this page. But because Antifa.com is currently redirecting the JoeBiden.com, that's not
going to work. So instead, we go to Web.archive.org, we put in Antifa.com. And it's going to bring
up the records here of all of the times that Web site has been archived.
[00:05:12] Here's the really interesting thing. If we go back to, you know, 2017, when we know
that it had Russian registration information, we can see here that these are all blue dots indicating
the days when the page was archived. Now let's skip ahead here to 2020. All of a sudden, we see
green dots. What a green dots mean. We'll look down here. Green indicates redirects. So we can
see that this domain name was not redirecting, it seems, until as early as May 31 of 2020. But it
wasn't as of January. So the redirect from antifa.com to Joe Biden is very recent. Had nothing to
do in 2017 when it was owned by someone who used a Russian private service. And now that is
linked to a private service registered in Panama. All of a sudden that's when it starts redirecting.
[00:06:05] And, you know, just for reference, if we go back to that time frame when it had the
Russian private service and we look. So here's a record from February 23 of 2018. We can scroll
up here and choose different days in the Wayback Machine. It says this domain is for sale. So at
the time that it had this very tenuous link to Russia, somebody was actually trying to sell the
domain. And it only started redirecting to Joe Biden in May of 2020. So that's a quick run through
of who is and how we can use archives to actually disprove a claim that was published. You can
use this to look up any Web site. You can go back in time on archive.org if it's been archived and
you'll find it's really, really helpful.
[00:06:47] So that's it for our second video. Let's move on now and show you a cool tool for
connecting Web sites together. 
