Module 3 Video 1: 
[00:00:00] Hey, and welcome to your first instructional video for week three. As mentioned in the
intro, we're going to be covering content analysis. This is, in the simplest terms, really about how
to read a Web site. So let's talk about that a little bit.
[00:00:14] Now, I've got a lot of tips here on this first slide. So don't feel like, you know, you have
to memorize all of these. Use this as a resource. You can come back to it. Take a screenshot of
this. We'll make the slides available. And, of course, you'll be able to go back to it and read these
at any time.
[00:00:31] Now, the key takeaway here is that when you come to a Web site and it's part of an
investigation or you want to learn more about it, you really need to go through it in a systematic
way. So all of the main pages and category pages that might be listed on the footer, the about
page is really important. What does it say about who runs it and what it's related to? Read the
privacy policy. Read copyright notices. Do they mention companies? Do they mentioned people?
Are those different than what's listed in other parts of the Web site? So all of that is kind of you
trying to orient yourself and figuring out who is behind it. What kind of content are they
publishing? What do they claim to be? Do they know linked to related social media accounts?
Can you take some text from an article or from the about page and put it in quotes and throw it
into Google and see if it's been plagiarized from somewhere else? Does it list products, clients,
testimonials, all of these kinds of things?.
[00:01:27] This is how you read a Web site with an investigative mindset. You click tons of links,
you'll learn about who is involved. You'll learn if they're not disclosing who's involved. You see, if
they disclose social accounts or other kinds of Web sites, products, other things that they're
linked to. That's how you read a Web site with an investigative mindset. And that's what you need
to keep in mind as you come across Web sites that you're trying to figure out more about.
[00:01:52] So that's kind of the general orientation of it. One thing I want to do right now is
reinforce for you some of the skills and tools you've already learned. So right now, I want you to
copy this url: archived.vn/8W5tW.
[00:02:10] OK. I want you to take that. And what we're going to do together is we're going to head
and we're gonna go into our Web browser, into Chrome, or if you can't use Chrome, whatever you
have. And we're gonna make use of what Jane taught you about the WeVerify/Invid plugin to use
reverse image search. OK, so let's go and check that out in Chrome right now.
[00:02:30] So here we are with our Web site loaded. And you can see that that archived.vn url kind
of resolves to an archive page on a service called archive.today. This is a place where people will
save Web sites. It's kind of an alternative to the Wayback Machine. And it can be useful for saving
pages that sometimes won't save properly in the Wayback Machine.
[00:02:52] Now, what we have here is a company Web site, a company called a Atoses. They
specialize in Web site design, development, media and content. So kind of a, you know, a Web
site about Web site design. And what we're gonna do for reverse image search here is really
simple. You know, one of the things for me is I'm going to scroll and, you know, look at this Web
site and see what they're claiming. They're claiming they've worked on a bunch of different Web
sites. So that would be an avenue to investigate those more. They claim some stats about clients
and awards. And then here we have the people who work there and they all seem to have
LinkedIn profiles. So that's great. You know, we would click on the LinkedIn profiles. One of the
things we'd also do is we want to reverse image search. Some of these folks here to see, you
know, if they are who they claim to be, if we can figure out more about them. Because when I
looked at these people during an investigation, I said, you know, these kind of look like they're
they're stock images, the kind of photos that you can buy in places. They didn't, to me, look like
they were real people. And so here's what we did.
[00:03:52] You know, let's pick this guy here with his, you know, showing his nice watch in the
photo. I go to that. I'm going to right click with my mouse. And of course, I've got a bunch of
different plugins. But the one that you and I both share is the Fake News Debunker by Invid. And 
WeVerify. OK. And when you right click on an image and you open that from the menu options
there you can see that it gives you a bunch of image reverse search options. Now you can click all
and it will open a bunch of tabs in your browser for these different ones. I always make sure that I
look at Google, I look at Yandex and usually often at Tin Eye. So you want to search across
different engines.
[00:04:30] Now, if we run that search, let's take a look at what we got. So here are the results in
the Yandex for this particular guy, our smiling friend here. Now, we can quickly see here when we
scroll down, oh, we have results from Web sites called things like Shutterstock.com. That's a
stock image Web site. And what is the name of the image? "Business people smiling stock photo"
or we have other ones, "portraits of businessmen in eyeglasses at office." So that would be one
that's related on the page, you know. "Smiling young businessmen" and other ones here where
we can see that this is all coming from stock Web sites. So we can see right away. This is not a
real guy working at a company. This is a stock image. And if we compare that to our Google
results, we see him again. You know, Google is always suggesting search text here of what might
be related. Corporate man, smiling face. You know, he's a generic corporate man. But again, if we
scroll down, we see here very quickly stock images, stock images, stock images, business people
and work concept. So very quickly, we can see there's something wrong with the people who are
supposedly working with this company. And we do that by reverse image, searching the profile
photos of people who work at it, using the tool that Jane already taught you about.
[00:05:48] OK. So let's move on from our reverse image search. Moving on from reverse image
search. Let me let me take you a bit through the Atoses Web site again. So here we have on the
Web site. You might remember as we were scrolling down, we had, you know, them listing their
awards, their clients. And to me, what's interesting is, you know, they have this text. They're sort
of generically describing what they do. We create content with a strong communications purpose
grounded in research and communion's consumer insights, yada, yada, yada. I always like to take
search to take and search text like this on a Web site or on the about page, if I think it's
suspicious because people often just copy and paste. So if we were to do that, take that some of
this text, you know, a sentence of it or the whole thing, put it in quotes and throw it into Google.
What we do get is hits on at least two other Web sites, Byronnmeth.technology and sentre.id, who
both had the exact same text at some point on their Web site. So that is another suspicious
indication. Now, did this Web site, Atoses, have it before the other two and they copied it or did
Atoses copy from these other two? Well, that's something you're gonna be able to check out,
because I'm going to show you how to use Web site archives in a second. But the bottom line is,
if people are copying or using copy text, that's probably a sign. Again, they may not be what they
claim to be.
[00:07:12] OK. There again, there's the two sites that we're using, the exact same language.
Really simple stuff. Right. Reverse image search. Copy and paste some text into Google and see
what's there. If you know what to do, you don't have to be super technical.
[00:07:26] OK. So now let's get to our next section here in our first instructional video, which is
about analyzing social engagement patterns for particular Web site or for a specific article. So
there's two tools we're going to use. The first one here is you're going to need to mark down this
url and paste this into your Web browser. So its app.buzzsumo.com/content/web. OK. So take
that right now. Type that into your web browser. Hit pause on this video if you need to type it
down and do it. OK, so we're gonna get that open and one of your browser tabs.
[00:08:04] The other thing that you should already have installed is the CrowdTangle browser
extension that's there. I'm going to show you how to use that. OK. So get that BuzzSumo page
open up.
[00:08:15] And the next thing we're gonna do here is I got another Web site for you to visit. Here's
the Shorten linked. Put into your Web browser: bit.ly/3khAzYk. Again, if you need to pause the
video, do that right now. Open up the BuzzSumo url I gave you on the previous slide. Open up
this url. Put those in separate tabs as we're about to make use of them together.
[00:08:40] OK, here we go. All right. So heading over to my web browser here is that expanded
link of the one from bit.ly. So this is an article on a Web site called WashingtonPress.com. 
[00:08:54] And, you know, again, if we quickly look at this article page, we can see here that they
they are prominently displaying their Facebook page, which has 1.5 million likes. So that's that's a
pretty big page. And, you know, the content of the article here is less important to us. Well, we
want to understand is, you know, where is this article being shared? And if they have a big page
here, you can probably imagine that they shared it. But who else is sharing it? And what does that
tell us? OK.
[00:09:18] So really quickly and really easily. This is where a CrowdTangle browser extension
comes in. So if you follow my mouse up here, this is where the CrowdTangle browser extension is.
I have a lot of different browser extensions. But this is where CrowdTangle sits, where on a
specific page, CrowdTangle browser extension is really good for a specific article, not so great for
like home pages, as I'll show you. BuzzSumo's great for that second.
[00:09:44] OK. So we've got our article here. And what we're gonna do now is click on the
CrowdTangle browser extension. All right. So here it is up in my list. I have a lot of different
extensions that you can see. I'm going to click on this one. Sometimes. Takes a second or two to
load. And what we can see here is a really cool list of where on Facebook, not everywhere, but a
lot of these sort of big public pages and groups that might have shared this specific article. And
so we can see here, of course, you know, we've got our Washington press one which we know is
linked to the article. Right. We see that over here. And what's really cool about this is you can
hover over this, you know, little comment thing here. And we can see the text that was used to
share it just in angry relatives of the victim are calling, et cetera, et cetera.
[00:10:30] So we can see how they shared it on their own page. But we can also see there's a
huge page here called Occupy Democrats with 8.7 Million fans. Oh, they use the exact same
share text. And here's another pretty big page. Thank you. President Obama, 487,000 fans. The
exact same share text. Anti Trump Army. The exact same share text. Impeach Trump with 1.6
million fans. Exact same. Fight Trump. Exact same.
[00:11:00] So one, of course, we can see the amount of interactions here and we can also see the
last seven days of Twitter shares and we can look at other places. But the point here is that we
very quickly see from just looking at who shared this post, that there is identical share text across
a range of all kind of left wing American pages who who potentially are connected. Right. So right
there, we now see the openings of a network that this Web site may be a part of. And remember
our tip about reading the about page? Well, if we go to the about page, you know, one of the
other things that we're going to learn right away is they say they're an affiliate of Occupy
Democrats. So this is a network. It's connected to Occupy Democrats. We see that from the
about page. And then we see a whole bunch more pages just by using the CrowdTangle browser
plug in on that one article.
[00:11:50] Now, let's do our BuzzSumo trick here. So here we go. We're gonna copy and paste
Washington press dot com. Do that in your browser right now. Pause it if you need to take a
moment. And I've got BuzzSumo opened up here in my other browser tab. Now, one thing I
should note is I have a paid account to BuzzSumo, so I'm going to see a lot more results than
you'll see just with your free account. But it's still helpful, even with a free account. And all we're
gonna do here is we copy that url. We're gonna paste it right in to the search bar. We're gonna hit
search.
[00:12:22] And what it's going to do is show us. And the filter is set for the past year. It's gonna
show us the top most engaged articles from this Web site. And you can see a Facebook
engagement's pretty high here. And when we hover over it, it gives us a bit more info. It also gives
us Twitter, Pinterest. And what we see right now is that by default, it's sorted by total
engagement. So it sort of totals up all of these together. But if we just wanted to see, like, you
know, the top Facebook engagement, it would reset and show us what that looks like.
[00:12:54] So with the CrowdTangle browser extension, we see one url one article and we see a
network there and we can go investigate those pages and the Web sites they share and with
BuzzSumo, we can also get a sense of this Web site of its most popular content. So those are two
really useful tools for figuring out the social engagement about a particular url. 
[00:13:14] Now we've learned that. So let's just recap here, really quickly, some other final tips to
wrap up this instructional video about content analysis. You know, again, I don't feel like I have to
memorize all of these right now. You can take a screenshot. You can access the slides later and
learn about them. But a tip I always tell people is, of course, you know, you're going to visit a Web
site, but copying and the domain name, just domain.com, you know, without the HTTP in front of
it and put that in quotes and into Google, and then you're going to see what people sort of say
and what Google knows about that Web site. OK.
[00:13:48] You can also do the same thing on Twitter and Facebook and see what people are
sharing from the Web site and what people might be talking about, about the Web site. There's
also a free tool called SimilarWeb.com, which will show you some of the traffic patterns where the
traffic comes from to that Web site. It doesn't give you a huge amount of info for free, but it gives
you some. And of course, if you are interested in a specific page, you've got, you know, other
options in terms of looking at the archives of it. And one thing that you can do is you can search
on archive.today, which also uses domain name archive.is to see if people have saved other
pages from that Web site. And there's another great one called cachedview.com, where you can
put in a specific you URL and it will tell you if there are archived pages of it. So if you're
wondering if a page has changed over time, cachedview.com is great. The Web archive, which
we're gonna look at next video is great. And so is archived.today or archive.is.
[00:14:46] So that's content analysis, as you can see. It's really easy. It's really straightforward. If
we know just a few tools, we can have a huge amount of information and jumping off points just
from reading and doing some basic analysis really quick. That's it for this video. 
